Data Analyst vs Data Engineering vs Data Scientist

These roles are not clearly differentiated and frequently overlap, especially in small companies where a certain person may perform different roles.

In order to make business decisions, Data Team has to provide business insights. This means answering business-related questions, such as current sales performance or estimation of inventory needs in the future.

The key to understanding these three roles is the journey the data takes from the data generation, through the data transformation, to the business decisions made from the outcome of data analysis.

This is a brief description of each role.

Data engineers provide the infrastructure.

Data comes from different sources. Data is also in different formats (structured, unstructured…). Data shall be extracted from data sources, transformed and loaded (ETL process) into a Data Warehouse or Data Lake, including data cleaning and normalization. Also, data shall be able to be aggregated and processed. Data engineers are in charge of these tasks and should have skills such as data modeling, programming (SQL, Python, Scala, Java), and expertise in SQL and no SQL Databases, Big Data platforms and ETL tools.

Data analysts generate business insights.

They have business domain knowledge. They define which questions shall be answered and use the Data Warehouse to process the information to generate insights that are reflected in reports that will answer these questions. They are experts in Excel and Business Intelligence tools. Also have some knowledge of SQL, statistics, programming and ETL.

Data scientists develop models that will make predictions

While descriptive analytics tells what has happened and predictive analytics tells what could happen, prescriptive analytics tells what should be done.

Machine Learning helps with predictive and prescriptive analytics. And data scientists will do the job by developing models trained with the data applied to machine learning algorithms.

They are experts in Machine learning, statistics, programming (python, R), SQL, and data cleaning and visualization.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q9oAZwhuUy4&list=PLt3Sat2h_Yg7Ek_NLDGv_BecH6ixxFVVj